(upbeat music)
All right, folks, let's build an Etch-a-Sketch.
These are sort of fun.
I really like building these demos
because now that I think we know enough
about the fundamentals of JavaScript,
we certainly have still got a lot to learn,
but I think that we should get practicing
in building some sort of fun stuff
so you can actually put your skills into gear.
What we're gonna be building here is an Etch-a-Sketch,
where you can just use your arrow keys
to move the thing around.
I'm sure you all had a Etch-a-Sketch when you were a kid.
You can move this thing around.
I've added a couple little fun things to it
where the color of it is just this rainbow,
and then we can shake it and refresh.
A couple of other things about it,
whenever you reload the page, it picks a random spot
to put it on.
Topics we're gonna be covering here.
I would say DOM elements and keyboard events
are things that we've learned.
We're going to be learning a little bit about this thing
called canvas, which is part of HTML and JavaScript.
And then we're also gonna be touching
upon a switch statement which we have not learned yet,
but I think is a perfect opportunity to introduce it.
We've got this, 33 Etch-a-Sketch folder here,
and you should open up the index.
The HTML provided this for you.
Let's go through it real quick.
We've got a, this body class doesn't need to be there.
We've got a canvasWrap.
Then we have our canvas element.
This is an HTML element that's used for drawing on.
I've explicitly given it a width and a height
of 1,600 by 1,000.
And then if you take a look here,
you'll see that I've have that in CSS.
And the reason behind doing that is because
this is the actual width.
You can think about this as the actual width of an image.
This is the actual width of the canvas,
and then the CSS, it just displays how big
it should be on the screen.
And the reason why I have that is
so that it won't look pixelated
because on most screens, I'm on a high 4K screen here.
If you're on our iPhone or something like that,
these things are going to be high resolution
and when we're dealing with pixel-based stuff,
you wanna be at least double
so you get nice and crisp stuff on the page.
We've got that.
I've also got a button at the bottom here.
That will be Shake.
I've put them in a div 'cause maybe you could also
give yourself buttons where you could,
maybe you can make knobs.
Maybe you just put Up, Down, Left, Right buttons for mobile.
Sky is the limit!
Past that, that's pretty much it.
We've got this little animation here.
I'll dive into that when it's time,
but let's crack open up our JavaScript file
which is Etch-a-Sketch.js.
And then let's also open up this index.html
in the browser so it looks the same,
but it doesn't do anything.
Open up our dev tools, no errors in there.
We're doing good.
What do think we do here?
We console.log, it works.
I know this is silly, but the amount of times
I get email from people being like,
Can't make it work, frustrated.
I've spent five hours on it.
And then the question is, well did you link
up the right JavaScript file?
And then the answer is, oh, no.
I'm sorry. (laughs)
Always make sure it works.
I do it all the time.
A couple thoughts here, I'm gonna write
some pseudocode as to what we wanna do here.
We need to select the elements on the page.
That's probably going to be the canvas,
the shake button, then we want to set up
our canvas for drawing.
I'll explain that in just a second
like we need to do, if I can spell drawing.
There we go.
Drawing, what is wrong with that>
That's the right word, yeah.
Then we want to maybe write a draw function,
and we wanna write a handler for the keys.
We probably want a clear or shake function.
I think, finally, we should just listen for arrow keys.
Okay, cool.
If you've never seen canvas before,
and I sort of expect you haven't,
the way that it works is that you go ahead
and grab onto the canvas.
Then you grab onto this thing called a context,
which is either 2D or 3D.
We're gonna be working with 2D canvas today.
And then you've got a set of APIs,
a set of methods that are used for drawing
to the canvas.
Think about like Microsoft Paint.
All of the things that you've known from Microsoft Paint,
rectangles, circles, drawing, lines, borders,
different fill colors, all of those things that you know,
all of those are available to us in canvas,
and they're used for when you wanna programmatically
draw something to the browser
and in like divs and stuff aren't gonna cut it.
And you inspect the sucker right here,
you'll see that it is just a regular old canvas element.
So at const canvas = document.querySelector.
And we'll grab the, it has an ID of etch-a-sketch.
(sings notes) There we go, in this case,
I've given it an ID, so #etch-a-sketch.
Then we will also right away get the context.
The canvas is the element, and the place
where we do our drawing is called the context,
where we will be drawing our circles and everything, too.
We can const ctx.
That's a pretty common naming convention for the context,
and we just grab our canvas.
Then we call the getContext method on it.
And you ask it for the 2d context.
You can also do 3D context.
If you look for three js.
Look at this.
This stuff is canvas but in 3D.
I don't know what this demo is gonna look like, but
Headphones Recommended, woo!
I don't know if you can hear the music here or not,
but this is pretty nifty.
This 3D stuff is pretty cool.
Is that like a little panic?
Doot-doot, aw, look at this thing turning
around and around.
So that's 3D canvas.
If you were to inspect this,
you see there's a canvas element right there.
What we're doing is not that cool.
Well, it is.
Etch-a-Sketch is cool, but it's not 3D. (laughs)
Then we need that Shake button.
That Shake button has a class of shake.
I just to duplicate that
shakebutton = document.querySelector,
.shake.
We've got all of the different elements that we want.
Now, what we need to do is set up
our canvas for drawing.
We will just set a couple of defaults on the canvas.
So it's ctx.lineJoin = 'round'.
And ctx.lineCap
is also equal to 'round'.
This just ensures that we get a smooth drawing
because by default you're gonna get a squared off edge.
And that doesn't look as good.
If you set it to round, you can also set the width
of the line to be as wide as you want.
By default, it's one pixel.
We want it to be a little bit thicker than that,
so we'll set the line width to be just 10.
You don't have to specify pixels there, just 10.
If we were to refresh this here, and take a look at our ctx,
you see we get this canvas rendering context 2D.
And inside of there are all these different properties
that you can set or get from them,
including what color the fill will be,
what color our stroke will be.
You see the lineWidth is already been set to 10.
That's 'cause what we just did right there.
Now, what we need to do is we have to put our drawer,
so if you think about, let me open up
the example that we have, the finished version here,
you see that we have to put a dot somewhere
'cause that's where we need to start.
That's how an Etch-a-Sketch works.
And you see it's randomized on page load.
Let's just get it showing up somewhere right now,
and then we'll work on randomizing that.
We will take the ctx, and we will run this thing
called beginPath.
And that will start the drawing.
You can think about if I have a marker,
and I'm gonna draw on a page, what do you have to do?
Well, you gotta put the marker on the page first.
That's what beginPath does.
And then you need to move the context, so ctx.moveTo.
And where do we wanna start at?
Let's start 200 and 200.
I'll show you what that means in just a second.
200 pixels in, 200 pixels from the top,
and then we run ctx.lineTo.
And we also wanna give that exact same values,
and then you run ctx.stroke.
And that will draw a line between where you started
and where you drew your line to.
That will make an invisible line.
And then you can stroke it.
If I refresh that, you see we've got a dot
200 pixels over and 200 pixels down.
Now, what I think is really cool about a Etch-a-Sketch
is that it could start at a random spot.
How could we find a random spot in this Etch-a-Sketch?
Well, you could take the width.
You could take the height,
and then you could just generate a random number
between zero and the width and the zero and the height.
That's actually what we're gonna do.
Let's go up here, and we'll say const width = canvas.width,
and const height = canvas.height.
Now if we console.log the width and the height,
we should get, what are we gonna get?
Are we gonna get, oh, you see what happened right there?
I'm just gonna bring it back there.
I'm gonna save it.
It's doing destructuring for me,
and I'll explain this in just one second.
Let me just save it and show you that it works.
We get 16 and 100 because that is the actual width
and height of the canvas, not the display width,
which if I hover over top of this, you see it's 800 by 500,
so totally fine there.
Now, one little sort of gotcha, or not gotcha,
but neat thing is if I bring this back,
I said, the width = canvas.width
and the height is equal to the canvas.height,
if you are simply taking, making variables
from a property on an object,
you can short form this by, instead of saying
console.width = canvas.width
and console.height = canvas.height,
we can say const  = canvas.
And what that will do is this is called destructuring,
meaning that we're gonna take the width property
and put it into a variable called width.
We're going to take the height property
and put it into a variable called height.
And this is just a nice short way to do it.
This is especially helpful when you have,
I don't know, five or six different variables
that are coming off of properties
named the exact same thing.
We'll do a lot more destructuring in there,
but that's the first time that we're using
it in the wild here.
We're gonna remove that, and maybe we should put
a little comment here.
Make a variable called height and width
from the same properties on our canvas.
And why are we doing that?
Just 'cause I like to have like top level variables.
It's easier to use when we're doing math.
It's much easier than writing canvas.width,
and we just say .width.
Now, what we wanna do is create random x and y
starting points on the canvas.
How do you create random values in JavaScript?
Well, we can take a look here.
You probably have seen that we have Math.random,
and that gives us just a random number
that seems to always be underneath one.
Well, let's take a little quick look at the docs
and read about that.
Can we just pass a random number?
Can we pass 100?
No, that doesn't do anything.
Math.random doesn't take any arguments.
Let's take a look at the docs.
Math.random returns a floating point,
floating point means it has decimals,
pseudo-random number in the range of zero to one,
inclusive of zero but not one.
And that means there's a possibility
that you will get zero, but you will never get one,
which approximately uniform distribution
over that range, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah.
The way that it works is that that's all it does.
It doesn't take any arguments or anything like that.
What you can do is you can take that Math.random value
that it gives you and multiply it by,
if we multiply it by 100, we're gonna get a random number
between zero and 99.9999999.
You see, it keeps, every time I run it,
you get a random number.
Then what we can do is we can run Math.floor against that.
And that's going to give us the lower level value
that we want, so it'll give us a number
between zero and 99.
You could use Math.ceil if you wanted one
between one and 100.
(deep electronic chiming)
But since we're dealing with pixels here,
we start at that zero.
That works just fine.
That's exactly what we're gonna do right here.
We'll say, let x, that's where we're gonna start,
and I'll show you why we use let in just a second.
We will take Math.random
times the width that we have,
and then we can wrap that sucker in Math.floor.
Now, let's just go ahead and swap out our x-values here.
That is the first one.
Whoa, now, I believe when we refresh the page,
we are randomly getting an x-value here, see?
See on the horizontal plane,
we're getting a random x-value.
And then we'll do that for the y-value as well.
That is the height.
And then we can swap out these with the y-value.
Beautiful, now we might need to come back and modify that
just so that it moves a little bit quicker,
but I'm gonna leave it at that for now.
We'll circle back and see what problems that we have.
Right now, whenever you refresh the page,
you get a random x and y-value, a little dot pointing, too.
I think it's cool.
It's like when everything is a variable
you can, (laughs) look at that.
You just get a random dot showing up at a random point.
That's so random!
20 is kind of cool as well.
We'll keep that at 10.
And actually, I can show you this right now.
Let's set it to 40 and take off the lineCap and lineJoin.
And it doesn't give us anything, does it?
Change that to square.
You see that we get an actual square value there.
Keep those all at round.
That's what we want, and I'm gonna take the lineWidth to 10.
Now that we have the basis of our canvas working,
I want to, let's write the handler for working with the keys
'cause we need to know if we need to move
this little guy up or down or left or right.
We will write our handler,
and we'll make it a function called handleKey,
and console.log HANDLING KEY.
And then we can listen for the arrow keys,
which is down here.
We'll take our window and a addEvent,
so you can listen for the keydown event on anything,
like we already did it on text inputs.
But if you wanna listen to it site wide,
you just listen on the window.
We listen for a keydown, and when that happens,
we wanna run the handleKey function.
And now if we go to our console here,
and I'm gonna press my arrow keys now,
Up, Up, over, Right, Left, Down, Down, Down.
You see what's happening here.
Actually, this is interesting.
When I hit my arrow keys,
and I go Down, Down, Down, the page is also scrolling.
That seems to be a default.
Not sure if you wanna turn that off
unless you are specifically accounting
for it being on a really small window.
But if you did wanna turn that off,
you could just pass the event here.
Let's use e and just run e.preventDefault.
The default of an arrow key is to scroll the page.
You see now it's not doing anything.
If you did want to do that, you can go ahead and do that.
I think you probably would wanna do that,
just making sure that this UI still shows
regardless of the browser size.
Then what we can do here is
let's just console.log the e.key.
Now, when (laughs), you know what's happening here?
I just screwed myself because I'm trying to hit Command + R
to refresh the page, and it doesn't work
because I have listened for every keydown event.
And my switching tab keyboard shortcut still works,
but my refresh shortcut is no longer working.
It's because I have just nuked all of the key defaults.
So that's probably not something we wanna do,
so let me take that off temporarily.
And I gotta hit the Refresh button manually like a sucker.
There we go, now, if I refresh with Command, it works.
If I were to now hit my arrow keys,
Up, Down, Left, Right, or really any key
that is on my key, you see that it's all happening.
We really only care about the arrow keys.
What we can do is we'll check if that key value
has the word Arrow in it.
We'll say, if e.key.includes
the word Arrow, then, and no we haven't
done this flow control yet,
but this is what is referred to as an IF statement,
we check if the e.key that includes the Arrow,
and that will return true or false.
And if that's the case, then let's move our logic
inside of here, and we can also move our preventDefault
inside of that IF statement.
Now, I use all my arrow keys, but I'm still able
to refresh the page with my other shortcuts that I have.
Next, what we wanna do is that's just the handler.
And I think we'll hand off the key to the draw function.
We'll make a function here called draw.
And that should take in an argument
now instead of just having a key passed
as the first argument, what I'm gonna do is
I'm going to take in an options object,
which will contain everything that I wish to pass
to this draw object.
And the reason we do that is sometimes your functions
will have six or seven things
that need to get passed into it,
and it's too long to pass in one, two,
three, four, five, right?
It's too much to pass in to a function
in that specific order,
especially if some of them are optional,
like you don't have to pass in the third argument.
That starts to get a little bit hairy.
So what most of us will do is we will just pass in
an options object, and then inside of that,
we'll pass different properties of that object that we need.
So options, and then we will inside of here,
we will call that draw function.
And I know we haven't learned objects just yet,
but we can pass in a object where it has a key object,
and I wanna say e.key.
We could pass the entire event there if we want,
but I'm just showing you how to pass
just what we need into it.
Then if we go inside of here and console.log the options,
let's see, so we've got our listener.
Listens for keydown, runs handleKey,
and we check if it's an arrow
and then pass that along to our draw function.
You see now, our draw function has an object
and inside of that there's just one property
called a key, and it tells us if it's ArrowUp.
Another little thing that I like to use
is similar to how we use destructuring,
up, where was it?
Right here, where we took the property
and made it into a true variable of that property name.
We can also use destructuring in our function declarations.
This options, instead of console.logging option.key,
you see what I'm doing there?
We can destructure this options object
directly into a key variable.
And then that will allow us just to have
a top level variable called key.
This little curly brackets here is called
object destructuring where we can take properties
and rename them into proper variables
and then that just allows us to have shorter variable names
inside of our object.
That's what we'll be using in here.
Now, I'm gonna get rid of the console.logs inside
of the handler and just console.log
the key in our draw function.
And you see we get ArrowDown, Right, Left, et cetera.
Now, when somebody uses their keys,
we can go ahead and start to draw directly on the canvas.
Just like we've created our beginPath here,
we can do that.
So we can take our context and call .beginPath.
So start the path,
then we can move to, similar to how we had to do this,
move to where we wanted to go,
that's what we need to do again.
We need to move the context to where it was, so ctx.moveTo.
And we'll just move it to where the x and the y-values were.
And then, here is where we need to move our x and y-values,
depending on what the user did.
If we were to say x = x - 10
and y = y - 10,
and then we can call our ctx.lineto
x and y again, so did you see what we did here?
We moved to where it used to be.
We changed the x and y-values,
and then we created a line to the new x and y-values
and then did our ctx.stroke.
Now there's a bit of problem here.
It says x is a constant.
My Prettier, or my ESLint, it took these let x and y-values
and says, hey, you're never actually changing these.
I'll make them consts for you,
but now since they are changing,
I need to make sure that these values
are changed to let because they do get reassigned.
This is a perfect use case of when you would
wanna use let over something like const.
Also, it did a little short form here
where I set x as equal to
x minus 10.
When I save that, it just short-forms it into x -= 10.
That's the same thing as saying x = x - 10.
Now when I refresh, I'm gonna hit a key.
(makes buzzer noise) Okay, I've got a bit of an error here.
What does it say?
Ctx.lineto is not a function.
Capital T on To.
Ready?
(laughs) Nothing's happening 'cause I'm focused in
on my dev tools here.
Here, focus the actual thing, oh, ope, ope, whoa!
See what's happening is every single time I do any key,
we remove 10 from the x and 10 from the y,
and then we paint.
And obviously that's not what we want,
but (laughs) it's, you can see how it's responding
to our key presses and even as I hold it,
which is really cool.
The one little thing is I don't like hard coding
these values like this.
What we'll do is up here we'll make one variable amount,
and we'll set that up here and then just reference it.
And that way we can change the value whenever we want.
We'll go up here and we'll say,
let's do it right at the top, const,
we'll call it MOVE_AMOUNT = 10.
And you see, oh, Wes, why are doing this?
Why is it all capitals, and why did you use underscore?
You just broke from all of the tradition.
And that has nothing to do with, I don't know,
best practice or whatever, but it's something
just some developers do, and I have picked it up myself is
when it is a true constant,
meaning that that value will never change,
we tend to make it in all uppercase and use underscores.
Somewhere along that got into the way
that I like to think about things.
And now whenever I see this, all caps and underscores,
I know that is a true constant
because we talked about how consts
aren't really all constant.
They can be changed. (laughs)
And then what we can do is we can go anywhere
we've used 10, like right here,
and right here,
and right here.
Now we have used just one variable
to reference the width everywhere we go,
and you can see now is if I just change
that one variable in our application to 60,
you'll see that it's much bigger.
Obviously, we don't just wanna go up and to the left.
We need to go back into our draw function
and write a little bit more code
that will, depending on which arrow key
that the person has done, then we can do it.
Now, we haven't really learned about flow control,
and that is using IF statements and whatnot.
But this is a perfect use case to learn
for something else called a switch statement.
I don't use switch statements all that often,
but this is a perfect use case for it.
Now, a switch statement is essentially saying,
take in a variable, like the key,
and depending on all of these different cases,
they might go up, they might go down,
they might go left, and they might go right.
We have four possible cases here,
and each of those cases has a different outcome.
So a switch statement will allow us to say
based on these four different outcomes, do the following.
What we can do is we will also remove these right here
'cause this is not actually what we want to do.
And we will run switch.
And you pass it the key,
so you, basically, the thing that you want to run
the switch against, which is the key.
And then we can, well, we gotta spell switch right,
then these are all of our cases.
We say case key is equal to ArrowUp.
And this is the same thing as if we were to have
an IF statement here,
we'll say if the key is equal to ArrowUp.
And then we could have
an else if the key is equal to ArrowDown.
But a switch statement makes it a lot more readable
in this case, and I really like that.
So case ArrowUp, and then you say,
if they go up, then we wanna change our y-value
to equal to y minus MOVE_AMOUNT.
And I'm gonna go ahead and save that.
And you'll see, I'm gonna save it again,
it's yelling at us for some reason.
Let's see, what is it saying?
Expected default case, oh, yeah, I haven't done that yet.
So a switch statement should always have
a default case of where if it's not ArrowUp,
ArrowDown, ArrowLeft, or ArrowRight,
then what should happen?
And that hopefully should never happen,
but it's best practice to always give your cases a default.
So we'll say default, and the default is just going to be
a keyword called break, BroadcastChannel, break.
And actually, at after every single case,
you have to right the break keyword,
and what that will do is it will stop the switch
from running, skip over the rest of it
'cause we've done what we need to do,
and then move over to the next line.
What we've just done there is we've only implemented
the case for ArrowUp.
Will it work?
Woo!
Left, right, and down do not work,
so let's go ahead and do that.
We can just basically duplicate that one
to three more times, and I'm going to ArrowRight.
And if that's the case the x amount is incremented.
We have ArrowDown, and if that's the case,
the y amount is incremented.
And then our final one is ArrowLeft,
and if that's the case, the x amount is decremented.
Now it's giving me grief about this x here.
X is a const, oh, you know what?
That's Prettier, or ESLint.
It always changes it.
If you have a let value and it doesn't see you
changing it anywhere in your code,
it will just change it back to a const for you.
You have to change that back to a let again.
And we'll go back to the switch case,
and we'll try it.
Up, up, over, over, over, down, down, down,
over, over, oh-ho! (laughing)
Looking cool!
That is the very first way that we have it.
I like that!
This is kind of fun.
Give yourself a break.
Play with this for a couple minutes.
But now what we wanna do is do this where the color
of the snake changes its color as we go along.
And that is actually a very simple thing to do,
and it's just changing the HSL values.
If you've never seen the Mother-effing HSL,
HSL is a way to declare color in a browser,
similar to we've got hex codes, and we've got RGB,
but HSL is a really cool way to do it.
And if you just hover over it,
you can see that the H value goes from zero
to, I think 360, 359.
And then once you pass that it'll just wrap around
and keep going through the rainbow.
We can use that value by every time we move the,
every time we move this little cursor,
we just increment the H value, hue, by one.
And that will just give us a little rainbow.
We can go up here,
and we will make a new value
called hue, let hue
= 0.
And then we'll change the color of the stroke,
so ctx.strokeStyle =,
and I'm gonna use backticks here.
It's gonna be hsl, and we could say hsl 100,
100%, and 50%.
And that will give us a green color
because 100, 100% saturation
gives us nice bright colors
and then 50% lightness all over.
So you see that.
Now if I were to just refresh this,
you see it's always green.
But if we were to interpolate this hue value, hue.
Now you see it's always red,
but every single time that we use our draw function,
let's increment that hue by one,
and then update the strokeStyle.
We'll do here say increment the hue.
So will say hue = hue + 1,
and I'm gonna give that a save.
And it will change it back to hue += 1.
It's gonna yell at me because hue probably
got changed back to a const.
We'll change that back to a let
'cause we are updating that value.
And then we can just take this whole thing
and paste it again down here
'cause you do have to, even though we've set it
on page load to be a variable, that's done.
It's not like a live variable
or anything where we'll notice
that the variable changed and update itself.
We do have to explicitly update the strokeStyle by one.
And it works!
You know why?
It's 'cause I have this line value way too high.
Let's change that to 10.
Woo!
And if you want it to go maybe a little quicker,
we can do plus 10.
Ooh, that's actually cool!
I like that!
Let's make this bigger, 50.
This is where I start to lose it
'cause it's too much fun not to play with it.
Oh, I like that a lot.
And of course, you could replace this
with Math.random * 360.
Does that work?
Rainbow!
Oh, that's even, that actually looks great!
I like that a lot.
(makes fluttering sound)
You can have a lot of fun with HSL because the hue value,
as long as it's between, actually, it doesn't
even have to be between zero and 360
because a hue value of 361 will just wrap around
back to the start of the HSL grid.
And you can tell that by just console.logging the hue here.
And you'll see once we go over 360,
we're just counting up forever.
And the browser is smart enough to say, oh, he's 1,730?
Let me wrap around HSL a couple times
and then just figure out what it is on this specific thing.
I used to do it where I would, once it hit 360,
I would reset the hue value back to zero,
but I've since learned that's totally not necessary.
What else do we have to do here?
The shake.
We'll make a clearCanvas function,
so function, clearCanvas.
And to do that we canvas.classList.add 'shake',
and if we try to run that sucker
from the terminal, clearCanvas,
what it will do is it will add this class of shake to it
and because it has a class of shake,
you'll see that I wrote the CSS here.
I say, when it has a class of shake,
run the shake over half a second,
make it linear and only run it once.
You could run it 10 times if you wanted.
Watch this.
It will run 10 times and then stop.
We only want it once,
and then the shake thing that I gave you
is basically taking it at different values of the animation
and moving it left and right a couple pixels.
That's really all there is to that, which is cool.
But we've got a couple problems there.
If I were to run that again,
it doesn't do anything.
And if we inspect it, it says because it already
has a class of shake.
If I remove that class of shake and then run it again,
you see that it does indeed reapply that animation.
We want that to happen every single time.
You might be thinking, okay, what are my options here?
Well, I could say, that shake takes half a second,
so after half of a second,
should I take the class off of it?
But trying to line up timers that are set in your CSS
in your JavaScript, it's okay but it gets you
into a world of hurt because what happens
is if you change a timer in your CSS,
then you also have to update the timer in your JavaScript.
What we can do is we actually listen for this animation
to finish, and then programmatically remove
that class from it.
And that, just like we can listen to a click,
we can also listen to this event called an animationend.
We'll take our canvas,
and we'll add an EventListener to it.
And we will listen for the animationend event.
And when that happens will we run a function
and in that we'll take the canvas,
and we'll take the classList,
and we will remove a class of shake.
Now, oh, I did something wrong!
Function,
what did I break?
Function, how do you spell?
There we go.
Now when I run it, actually, let's do
a quick little console.log in here,
console.log 'Done the shake'.
So clearCanvas, and this says Done the shake
just a second later.
And then when we run it again, and it should shake again,
oh, but we got Done the shake console.log twice.
Run it again.
Now we've got Done the shake console.log three times.
Done the shake, console.log four times.
What's going on here?
Well, this is a pretty common problem
that's happening is what we're doing
is when we run clearCanvas, we add the class
and then we listen for that animation to be over,
and then we remove it.
But what's happening is that this canvas still has
the EventListener of animationend added to it,
and every time we clear the canvas,
we're adding a new EventListener to it
over and over and over again.
And so by the time I run it now,
there's now five EventListeners,
listening for animationend on this canvas.
And I think if we inspect this canvas here
and click on Event Listeners, you'll see
that we're listening for the animationend event,
and every time we run it, they are,
there's a new one added.
Watch, I think if I were to run it again,
there's another one, right?
They just keep going, and I can manually remove them here.
And I think now if I run it, it should just do it twice
or three times I guess.
Maybe you have to click the Refresh button.
Yes, you have to click the Refresh button to see them.
That obviously not what we want,
and I told you earlier that there's another argument
to add eventListener.
There's, go get something,
listen for something, and do something.
Now there's a third arguments object for addEventListener,
and we've only, so far, used the capture here.
Now, we're gonna introduce a second option
which is called a once, and we set that to true.
And if you set once to be true, what will happen is
that addEventListener will unbind itself.
It will call removeEventListener for you
without having to write any code.
'Cause if we didn't have that,
what we'd have to do is we'd have to say
canvas.removeEventListener,
and then we'd have to reference the function
that it's inside of to remove it.
That's a bit of a pain.
So what we can do is simply just pass a third argument
to addEventListener, which is an object
that has once set to true.
And what that will do is it will automatically remove
its listener when the animation is done.
If I run the canvas, you see now it's only,
only listening, we're adding and removing
that EventListener as we need to, which is great.
Next, what we can do is can simply just hook
that up to the button.
We have our shake button.
So we say shakebutton.addEventListener,
and listen for a click.
And when that click happens, we will clear the canvas.
Let me go and draw some stuff on here.
And then I click Shake.
(laughs) It shakes it, but we forget to do the entire part
which is clearing the canvas.
And that is actually very simple.
We will do that, we add the shake,
then we clear it, and then we listen for the end.
So we say ctx.clearRect, and what that will do is
it will clear part of or all of it.
So we say start at zero, zero,
start in the top left-hand corner right here
and go for, I don't know, we can go for 500,
and go for 500 pixels.
Let's watch this.
Let's draw something in the top right-hand corner.
Now when I shake it, you see it cleared
the top 500-by-500 pixels.
Obviously we'll replace that with our variables
that we nicely created at the very top of this file,
width and height.
We got our width, and we got our height.
Beautiful!
So that's it, that is our first exercise here.
It's probably a little bit beyond what we've learned,
but that's my hope with a lot of these exercises
is that we're gonna push you.
We're gonna introduce some new concepts,
destructuring, canvas, right in the exercise,
you can get an idea of how it works
when you are in the head space
and building real-world things.
See you in the next one!